Debugging c workshop (#283)
NuevoFoundation/workshops: content/english/debugging/04-identify-the-problem3.md

---
title: "Step 1 - Finding the problem (Part 3)"
difficulty: "Intermediate"
weight: 5
draft: true
---

## Debuggers

Debugging code is such a widespread, common problem that people have built entire programs designed to help other programmers debug more efficiently. These are suitably named “debuggers”, and there are plenty of debuggers that work for C. We'll take a look at gdb, a common debugger used on the command line.

> GDB(GNU Project Debugger) is a powerful debugger that lets you debug a program from the command line, which is useful in cases where you don’t have access to a GUI. To use GDB, open a console in the replit below. First, compile the program we’ll use with GDB by typing `make examples/quicksort` (see the aside on quicksort). Next, run `gdb examples/out/quicksort`. This should open the GDB command line interface. In general, to debug a program with `gdb` you can use `gdb <name of program>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GDB (GNU Project Debugger) is a powerful debugger that lets you debug a program from the command line, which is useful in cases where you don’t have access to a GUI. To use GDB, open a console in the repl.it below. First, compile the program we’ll use with GDB by typing `make examples/quicksort` (see the aside on quicksort). Next, run `gdb examples/out/quicksort`. This should open the GDB command line interface. In general, to debug a program with `gdb` you can use `gdb <name of program>`.
```

It is important to keep note of the second flag. For debugging, you should ALWAYS make sure the compiler makes minimal optimizations to your code, because optimizations could drastically change how the code is run!
{{% /notice %}}

You should see something like this:

![GDB Sample Picture](../resources/w4-01.png)

Make sure that GDB says that it is `Reading symbols from examples/Quicksort...`, otherwise you didn't attach the program to GDB. You can exit GDB by entering the command `quit` (or any of its prefixes: `q` works) as if it were the normal shell command line.

To debug the program, we need to run it from GDB. Enter the command `run` (or `r`). This will execute the program as if you'd run it from the normal command line.

The program first prints the contents of the array to be sorted: an array index along with its corresponding value. This value is used to perform the sort. Next, it runs the sort algorithm, and finally prints out the array sorted along its values. You can see how the array indices are shifted during the sort!

> However, it seems that there is an array entry out of place! In theory, we can add a print statement somewhere in the `sort`

Reviewer: Complete this sentence

{{% expand "*Click to show answer*" %}}
`i`, `pivotIdx`, and `tmp` change (technically `tmp` is declared inside the loop though). 
{{% /expand %}}
<br/>
You can make GDB display these variables every time the debugger pauses by using the `disp` command. Run these two commands:

```bash
disp i
disp pivotIdx
```

Now, whenever the debugger stops, it'll display the values of `i` and `pivotIdx`.

At this stage, it is crucial to understand what the implementation is doing. Refer to the picture above to get an idea of the process, then try to match it with the code. Next, run a few iterations of the loop, watching the indices update. If you need a hint, open the expander below.

{{% expand "*Click to show hint*"%}}
When should `i` be updated - in the loop header, or under certain conditions within the loop body?
{{% /expand %}}
<br/>

Note that all debuggers should have the same basic concepts: they allow you to step through your code as it runs, in real time. You should almost always use debuggers over print statements. You won't regret it!

> ## Another Type of Bug: Memory Errors

Reviewer: To make the content more consumable, perhaps split this Valgrind section into a new page
